Virtual Paintbrushes and Short Necked Giraffes
Branden Hall
November 2010

A Web of Decisions
--
The creation of art is all about decisions. Artists start by choosing
their medium and their tools. Then they proceed to make decisions
about composition and slowly narrow down their choices to individual
lines, strokes and cuts.

But what if the artist isn't fully in charge of these choices? Various
artists in the 20th century explored this idea. One of the most most
notable, Jackson Pollack, let chance dictate where his paint would
splatter and drip.

In recent years artists have been experimenting with artwork that
surrenders some of the choices that make up their work not to physics
but instead to computer code. This trend has had the interesting side
effect of democratizing art. No longer is art something that just
lives in a museum. Now anyone with a consumer-grade computer can take
an artists code and generate new and interesting works.

A Modern Brushmaker
--
I have to apologize if the the preceding paragraphs make it seem like
I know much about art. I'm a programmer, a geek, and a tinkerer - but
I'm no artist. I'm lucky though, to have worked with a number of
digital artists over the last few years and some of their vast
knowledge about the world of art has rubbed off.

I've worked with these artists to help them bring their vision to code
and turn their ideas into living pieces of art. One of my main
collaborators, Joshua Davis, was originally a painter but over the
last 15 years he has transformed himself into a world renowned digital
artist.

Josh's medium of choice is the web - and for good reason. The web is
in many ways the biggest gallery man has ever constructed. The problem
is the tools of the web, compared to say, desktop applications, have
historically been limited and proprietary. Not that it's hampered Josh
much. Fundamentally art is about expression, not the tools used to
make it. That being said, new tools are always welcome.

A Canvas for the World
--
One such set of new tools, the next generative of open web standards
and the browsers that a run them, are just now becoming available.
While often placed under the banner of "HTML5" it's actually a
collection of standards including HTML, SVG, CSS and Javascript. The
one piece of these technologies that has been getting the most
attention by artists is, appropriately, the canvas tag.

The canvas tag allows, for the first time, web developers and artists
to use core web technologies to create and manipulate bitmap images
with code.  The canvas tag is in many ways the ultimate canvas - one
that the whole world can see.

From Code to Art
--
Many artists are already starting to use the canvas tag to create
beautiful things. But, the way you must write code to manipulate a
canvas has stymied others. The problem is one of tools. Many digital
artists are used to working with tools that allow them to do some
tasks with code while doing others, essentially, by "hand".

Applications such as Adobe's Flash Professional have proven successful
because they let artists work with a level of code they find
comfortable at every stage of their learning. Flash's model of
creating visuals is also quite different from the canvas tag. In
particular Flash allows artists to define symbols and then create
instances of those symbols that can each have a unique position,
color, rotation, scale, etc.

A Little Stretch
--
As Josh and I contemplated porting some of his artwork and style from
Flash into HTML5 we knew that it couldn't be a straight translation.
Being a web plugin, Flash is simply a different beast than canvas. But
that doesn't mean we couldn't port some of the concepts used in Flash
that Josh found most useful.

The first of these concepts that we've ported over are those of
symbols, instances, and auto-updated visual properties. This code,
known as Okapi.js (An Okapi is a short-necked relative of the giraffe
- it's also an "ok api", har, har!), is open source and quite simple
to use. It lets Javascript programers create graphical instance
objects that will, for example, automatically change position when
their "x" or "y" properties are modified.

Okapi.js isn't a complex library, but what it does is to make
designers and developers familiar with Flash's model extremely
efficient with HTML5's canvas. In fact, Josh and I were able to,
within a span of just 5 short weeks create both Okapi.js and it's
first test case - The Endless Mural. http://www.endlessmural.com

Generative Art for the Masses
--
The Endless Mural is one of the first sites to use HTML5 technologies
to democratize the act of creating generative art. It allows visitors
to choose from a wide selection of artist-created symbols, color
palettes and behaviors and combine these with their own creative
input. By playing with it's myriad of controls and scribbling users
can create such a variety of aesthetic experiences that it even
surprised me - and I programmed the thing!

I hope this article has been informative and I hope that if you're
even slightly interested in creating generative art for the web that
you take a look at Okapi.js.
